California, 1850, from land ceded to the United States by Mexico in 1848 under the terms of the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo.
Kentucky, 1792, from Virginia (District of Kentucky: Fayette, Jefferson, and Lincoln counties).
Maine, 1820, from Massachusetts (District of Maine).
Texas, 1845, previously the Republic of Texas.
Vermont, 1791, previously the Vermont Republic (also known as the New Hampshire Grants and claimed by New York).
West Virginia, 1863, from Virginia (Trans-Allegheny region counties) during the Civil War.
Congress is under no obligation to admit states, even in those areas whose population expresses a desire for statehood.
Such has been the case numerous times during the nation's history. In one instance, Mormon pioneers in Salt Lake City sought to establish the state of Deseret in 1849.
It existed for slightly over two years and was never approved by the United States Congress.
In another, leaders of the Five Civilized Tribes (Cherokee, Chickasaw, Choctaw, Creek, and Seminole) in Indian Territory proposed to establish the state of Sequoyah in 1905, as a means to retain control of their lands.
Instead, the Indian Territory, along with Oklahoma Territory were both incorporated into the new state of Oklahoma in 1907.
The first instance occurred while the nation still operated under the Articles of Confederation. The State of Franklin existed for several years, not long after the end of the American Revolution, but was never recognized by the Confederation Congress, which ultimately recognized North Carolina's claim of sovereignty over the area.
The territory comprising Franklin later became part of the Southwest Territory, and ultimately the state of Tennessee.
Additionally, the entry of several states into the Union was delayed due to distinctive complicating factors.
Among them, Michigan Territory, which petitioned Congress for statehood in 1835, was not admitted to the Union until 1837, due to a boundary dispute with the adjoining state of Ohio.
The Republic of Texas requested annexation to the United States in 1837, but fears about potential conflict with Mexico delayed the admission of Texas for nine years.
Also, statehood for Kansas Territory was held up for several years (1854–61) due to a series of internal violent conflicts involving anti-slavery and pro-slavery factions.
